Please tell us your name. I'm Lagi Menkare
Nasorona. Dendul Lama. Dendul Lama. Thank
you. His Holiness the Dalai Lama asked us
to record your experiences so that we can
share your memories with many generations
of Tibetans, the Chinese, and the rest of
the world. Your memories will help us to
document the true history, culture, and
beliefs of the Tibetan people.
Do you give permission for the Tibet Oral
History Project to use this interview?
Thank you very much for offering to share
your story with us. During this interview,
if at any time you want to take a break or
stop, please let us know.
And if you do not want to answer a
question or talk about something, let us
know.
If your interview were to be shown in
Tibet or China, Would this be a problem
for you?
There will be no problems. Thank you. And
we're very honored to record your story
and appreciate very much your
participation in the project.
How old are you?
71.
And where are you from in Tibet?
So the place
where I lived was called La Gong. And in
which province was La Gong?
I came to Lhasa in 1961-62 when the
Chinese created a lot of problems.
Where were you born? In which province?
So when you came to Lhasa, you were about
how old?
So I must have been about 36 years old and
when I came to Lhasa I had three children
with me and then three were born in Lhasa.
Okay.
So that's been so long ago. In your
village, what did your father do? Ms
Naganga, are there
conditions under the union or what offers
you? No, people don't seeued more as a
woman Or audio-visual people don't see it
anymore
So in those days my father was a farmer
working in the commune and then we would
dig up medicinal plants called poppy from
the ground.
So you were in a commune, a Tibetan
commune, or was this a Chinese commune? Do
you killsBL animals? Do you kill deer and
wild animals? No No tighter put together
if not put together re-decl
ministre
Then they would go to the fields and pick
the seeds. And then they would go to the
fields and pick the seeds. And then they
would go to the fields and pick the seeds.
So it was a Tibetan commune run by
Chinese. And the farmers harvested, when
the farmers harvested grains and wheat and
barley, we would have to give them to the
Chinese so being unable to endure the
suffering my husband and I and children
fled or went to went to Lhasa. Went to
Lhasa, right. So what memories do you have
of your childhood when you were a little
girl?
What should I say about when I was little?
I have no memories of my younger days.
Okay. What did your mother do? Son, Doyul
and daughter, now who's learning about the
mother's wife-to-be and daughter-in-law's
wife-to-be- 처. Mother's only daughter has
half 15 years left from birth, otherwise
she would still lose them. So we took them
together, we were still helping and female
and male sons.
So in the commune she was, she had the
task of milking and then she would milk
the cows. And then also carrying hay on
the back to be spread under the horses and
mules. And then after we escaped, I had no
idea about them, but I think they have all
passed away now. So did you help your
mother or your father with their work on
the commune?
No,
because I had little children then, and so
instead of helping them, I needed their
help.
How old were you when you had your first
child?
So we don't normally calculate our years
and ages. So it was like, you know,
animals giving birth. Likewise, we too
gave birth to our children. Do your
children live with you now?
No, not together. I have three children,
and I had my children in the hospital. Can
you tell us about your experiences giving
birth to children? So, Marwa, you are a
very good teacher. You have taught us a
lot of things. So, what do you think about
teaching us how to be a good teacher? I
don't know how to teach. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I don't know
how to teach. I don't know how to teach. I
don't know how to teach. I don't know how
to teach.
So I didn't give
birth
in hospitals and it was my husband that
helped me during the childbirth. and it
is only my daughter that was born in
hospital and I couldn't give birth to her
and all my other children including the
twins were not born in hospital. How did
your husband help you?
I was a little girl, and I was a little
girl. I was a little girl, and I was a
little girl. I was a little girl, and I
was a little girl. I was a little girl,
and I was a little girl. I was a little
girl, and I was a little girl. I was a
little girl, and I was a little girl. I
was a little girl, and I was a little
girl.
So when the first of the twins was born, I
was on my knees and my husband, he took
the child wrapped it in cloth and laid it
on the bed and then I went out to answer
nature's call and then I could feel that
there was another child in me and so I
told my husband that there is one more
child and he said it can't be but then I
said there is one more and then the other
one was born and while breastfeeding I had
to feed one child here and one child here
and it was same when I was feeding them
food later. At the same time, feeding them
one here, one here? At the same time.
Thujujjipa le chikla omadetje, chikla
omadetje, roa? Nyaka tew. Nyaka ngode.
Ngode nyaka sumte omadetje. Yes, because
both cried at the same time. Cried, cried.
And were all your children healthy when
they were born? Amla, puku ketiw ka ne
puku tsangma tangpo duwe? Shubha Bhat is
bright and his father was doing that, he
said.
So the second The second of the twins was
born leg first and I thought it was a
headless child. And then my husband pulled
it out and there was no crying so I
thought it wasn't alive. And when I
touched the leg it was warm and then my
husband cleaned it up. How did you feel?
Can you remember your emotions? Your
mother's strength. When Mother went home,
She told Your mother She wanted her to
follow She самой đihistoric practice
father and sister through her daughter
Very little, very little
water was sweeping she could not go to
Sangam and they robbed her of everything
was leaving there
So the twins, you know, if one child is
born,
I was the only one who was sick. I was the
only one who was sick. I was the only one
who was sick. I was the only one who was
sick. So the twins, you know, if one child
got sick around 12 o'clock, the other
would become sick at 3pm. So both had to
be carried to the hospital in Pasa. And it
was very difficult. And then later my
husband found work at a construction site.
And I could also find work, but I couldn't
do much as I was sick most of the time. So
when you were sick, who took care of your
children? one.
There wasn't
anyone else to take care of them. I had to
and then when my husband been returned
from work then we took care of them
together so when you lived in Lhasa did
you have family who also lived in Lhasa or
lived near you
I'm lucky that not me down pinga shambhala
in the hustle a your a your mother no no
both of us didn't have any relatives so
you said that you went to Lhasa and you
had three children what what made your
family go to Lhasa?
So we had to leave our hometown because we
couldn't survive there. there, there was
lack of food because if you couldn't work
hard, there was no grains for you, and
then since we had many children, both of
us couldn't survive there and that's why
my husband suggested that we go to Lhasa.
Why wasn't there enough food? And Magali,
how do you do the work? We do it by hand.
We do it by hand. We do it by hand. We do
it by hand. We do it by hand.
So in the commune system, you know, if you
could work, the officials gave you marks,
and if you didn't, you know, there was no
marks, which meant that you got no grains.
But you worked, didn't you? Did you eat
anything?
We did,
but there was nothing to eat, so we left.
Was it because you had so many children
that what you were allowed, what you were
allocated wasn't enough? So, sağ name
shows that he had pressure. Yes, I had
pressure.
Now, I'm a little tired, now I feel
confident about any poverty machine but
they do that for me to come on the study
people to gonna and they have a yes I did
say what any last another lots of jelly
Chito Joseph never know he said yeah the
allocation
wasn't sufficient and then when we were in
Hussar a friend of my husband suggested
that you know since we had many children
that if we went to Nepal it would be a
better life for the children so that's why
we came to Nepal. Right I'd like we'll
come back to Nepal in a minute but I was
wondering in what ways was life in Lhasa
different from life in the village?
Amal, we met in Thangbo with Amal on the
road. Did you ask her about the Kepa
recipe? Yes,
we did. As a child and as prends theorist,
we juts see people family village,
aromatic powder and they drink it. It was
a more herbal and Standing mother plant
that we sourced. How old were you? I was
very young. I was very young. I was very
young. I was very young. I was very young.
I was very young. I was very young. You
were very young. Were you very young? Were
you very young? Yes, I was very young. I
was very young.
So it was better in Lhasa because my
husband was engaged in the construction
work and then friends and other people,
they used to give us little bags of Sampa.
Were there other ways in which your life
in Lhasa was different from the village?
You had more food, but were there other
ways in which your life was different?
I don't know, I can't say.
So I have only so much to say. Right. So
your family decided to come to Nepal. Can
you tell us the story of coming to Nepal?
Now if I mistook it for decrease forление
or decrease You
We were so afraid, being because of his
laziness. He said that the monk who made
usiden
So from Lhasa there were times when we
were on foot and at times for an hour or
two we would ply by vehicles but since we
didn't have money to pay we couldn't get
vehicles right through and it was from the
border area of Tengri and Tamo that we
came towards Nepal. And we were with quite
a number of little children, and my
husband was carrying one of the twins over
his neck, and the oldest son was carrying
one of the other twins, and the pathway
was filled with snow, and there were some
Chinese people along the way that stopped
us, but since we were with little children
they allowed us to go and in fact there
were two girls that commented that the
twins were very beautiful and then thanks
thanks to the grace of His Holiness we
were able to escape safely how long did it
take you to come from Lhasa to Nepal?
So it might have taken about half a month,
because at times we were walking and at
times we could get lift in some vehicles.
So what did you take with you when you
left Tibet? the Via Norma to you on the
canne am LIE prison to do If somebody who
is just trying and just wants to make
their life better… This particular
religion can also get real
cells.
So we had brought nothing except our
blankets and a little bit of tsampa. And
when we reached Nepal, my husband had
friends to whom we sent message, and they
came to fetch us at the reception
committee office. And did you have enough
food, enough sampa for your whole family
to go for these two weeks?
included by the people with disabilities,
as well as the women of the village sick
and badly harmed by the virus, . We didn't
change these rules. We didn't go back to
our roots of education andidades like I
said, Naipa. There was no one I would
create in my village, there was no one I
wouldak to know and expose old women. if
they had listened to the government
quarantine regulations, I was a young
girl, and I was a young girl. I was a
young girl, and I was a young girl. I was
a young girl, and I was a young girl. I
was a young girl, and I was a young girl.
I was a young girl, and I was a young
girl. I was a young girl, and I was a
young girl. I was a young girl, and I was
a young girl. I was a young girl, and I
was a young girl. I was a young girl, and
I was a young girl. I was a young girl,
and I was a young girl.
So we had a little bit of tsampa, and I
used to feed the children in spoonfuls,
which they used to gulp and then we were
able to you know cross over a mountain and
there was a river and nearby we found some
Nepalese police and we were really very
scared and I told my husband you know will
they not kill us now and then we met some
merchants who said that now you need have
no fear because you will you are in
Nepalese territory and you will no longer
fall into Chinese hands But still they
were very scared. And then we saw some
Nepali road crew and they were living in
little tents. And so we entered one of the
tents and they gave us hot water and I
made little balls of dough with the Sampa
and hot water and fed my children. And
then we went to Dharamsala and we were
very happy to see His Holiness the Dalai
So you arrived in Nepal and then how did
you get to Dharamsala?
The reception committee there dropped us
to Dharamsala. I want to go back to make
sure I've understood something. So your
decision to leave Nepal, I mean to leave
Tibet, was because of hunger? What was the
reason why you left Tibet? Tibet.
soma thwa tsawa machi o criminals
So the reason
why we left our hometown one time was the
lack of food and livelihood in Hassa was
better than in the hometown, but our
children were not getting any education in
Hassa, and we were told that if we went to
Nepal, we would be able to admit our
children into school. So for the sake of
our children, we left Tibet. Right. So you
lived in Tibet when the Chinese were
there. How is life like for you under the
Chinese?
So I do not have much knowledge. That's
between in the offices, that happens, and
my job was just doing my work. And your
work was what? What was your work?
So our responsibility was harvesting the
parni and then de-husking them in a large
open ground during the commune, but I have
forgotten much of it. What about in Lhasa?
What was your work in Lhasa? So, it's
like
what I told you earlier, here,
constructing houses, digging the ground,
laying the bricks, and building as it
happens here. You did that? Amla adina la
lera chey na, kama basura dwe adina la?
Nga lera ka zote me na, nade. Lera ka zote
me. No, I couldn't go to work because I
was sick. Right. Okay. Did you have any
interactions with Chinese people?
No.
So did life change for you when the
Chinese came to Tibet?
Yes,
in In 1961-62, by then the Chinese had
already launched the liberation. And at
that time, when my husband and I escaped,
there wasn't many people escaping then,
but later on, more and more people started
coming. And what happened then? We were in
the same house. You mean the same house?
No.
Once we were at the reception center here
and then we were sent to see His Holiness
the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala and then the
children were put in school and then my
husband and I we were sent to a factory in
Dalahousey in Himachal Pradesh and then
there was no problem at all. Was your
husband affected at all by the Chinese
occupation?
Is theidoe different from your social
ladder in the community? The entrance was
different the opportunity was the idea of
the Orion I entered old earth with all my
knowledge and now I'm
together
with the children worker in Pasta and he
was you know laying the iron rods for the
construction and then after coming into
India and he worked as a embosser of
handmade carpets. Right at the beginning
you mentioned that most of your children
except for your last child were born at
home but one child was born in the
hospital. Why was that child born in the
hospital? What caused you to take that you
know go to the hospital for that?
So, I was having labor pains, but could
not give birth, so that's why I went to
the hospital. And your baby was safe. Yes,
I know it. I know it. Thank You, she塊se.
When I was a little child. 종 came and gave
us ricepoins. They used to dull
away ricepoins.
Very hard.
I was very sad. I was very sad. I was very
sad. I was very sad. I was very sad. I was
very sad.
Yes, the last child was born in hospital
after five or six days. Actually, the
labor pains had started and the child
wasn't born. So the nurse told me that I
would have to stay in hospital for a few
days because it was a big child. But I
didn't want to stay and wanted to go back
home. And my husband said that, you know,
wouldn't take me home, saying that, you
know, if we went back home, the child and
I would die. Is there anything else that
you would like to share with us about your
life in Tibet? We are very happy to have
you here. We are very happy to have you
here. That's about it. That's about it.
Thank you. If this interview were shown in
Tibet or China, would it be a problem for
you?
I don't know whether there will be any
problems or no problems. Is it okay if we
use your real name?
Yeah, but then if the Chinese come and
investigate, they may take me away. Thank
you very much for sharing your story with
us.